[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WIND HOWLING]
>> Oh, great, we got berries.
>> We got banana and berries.
Get the shot.
[CHATTER]
>> Oh, yes.
>> There we go, papa.
Three passion fruits or two?
There we go.
>> Excuse me.
>> Whoa.
[LAUGHTER]
[CHATTER]
>> I'm just checking the ticket
sales for tonight's event.
And it looks like we've got
almost 100 people, which
is good.
This is us.
[CHATTER]
>> If anybody has any questions,
let someone else know.
Because I got to get ready.
For those of you who don't
know me, my name is Kale Brock.
And it is the name I was
given when I was born.
It's on my birth certificate.
I didn't change it to suit
the trendy foods and stuff.
And I'm a journalist
and reporter
and have been reporting on
and talking about the gut
and the microbiome and
how it impacts your life
for the past five or six years.
It's been a fascinating
journey, and I can tell you
that there are some very
exciting things coming down
the pipeline, some of
them literally coming down
the pipeline.
Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're heading into
a medical center
to see a molecular geneticist.
>> And what are we
going to do there?
>> What are we doing there?
We're going to have a
look at my poo, basically.
I never thought I'd say that
to the camera, but now I have.
I think as a journalist
and researcher on the gut
microbiome, it's probably
responsible of me
to have a look at my own
gut bugs under the scope.
So that's what we're
going to do today.
Hello.
>> Hi, Kale.
Welcome to the Smart DNA Lab.
>> Thank you.
I believe you have my poo--
>> Yeah, let's go take a look.
>> --here, somewhere.
I've come to see Dr.
Margie Smith, who
is a molecular geneticist
studying the microbiome.
The microbiome is
essentially the makeup
of different microbes
from bacteria
to parasites and yeast, which
live on and inside of you.
And to test a microbiome,
you need a poo sample.
>> Poop can tell you quite
a lot about your gut health.
And we rely on a fingerprinting
technique, if you like.
So each bacteria has
its own fingerprint.
So we can drill down
to species level
to define what is actually
in the microbiome.
The attention that we're
seeing in this area is huge.
Because we've finally
realized that the microbiome
and the metabolites and
the bacteria produced
have a major impact
on our health.
>> We have microbes living
inside our digestive system.
And it's a very complex
microbial community.
There are bacteria.
There are viruses, fungi,
protozoa, worms, slugs,
all kinds of creatures.
And all of these
creatures live together
in harmony in a healthy person.
They plant each other.
They harvest each other.
They eat each other.
They control each
other, and they do not
allow any one of them to
overgrow and to dominate
the scene.
Problem is, we human beings are
very good at creating imbalance
on our planet.
When we take antibiotics, when
we eat chemical-laden food that
is grown for us by our chemical
agriculture, when we take
any other chemicals
into the body,
a part of that
microbial community
gets damaged, which means
the balance is upset.
So when that community
is not balanced
and certain microbes
are in excess
and other microbes
are not there,
we don't digest food well.
We don't absorb it well, and
we develop multiple nutritional
deficiencies.
At the same time, this
pathogenic microbes
digest food that we swallow
in their own sweet way,
converting it into a whole
host of very toxic substances.
And they damage the
integrity of our gut wall,
making it porous and leaky.
Holes develop literally
in the gut wall.
So these toxic chemicals that
these microbes have created
absorb.
They absorb into the
bloodstream and get
distributed all over the body.
And wherever they get
to, they cause trouble.
They will cause disease.
If they get in the
brain, they could
cause any group of symptoms
the brain can produce.
And sometimes these
group of symptoms
can fit into an established
diagnostic label,
such as bipolar disorder
or depression or anorexia
or schizophrenia or autism.
Indeed, every chronic
disease, whether it's
mental or physical disease,
begins in the digestive system.
>> The microbial cells in our
body are estimated to vastly
outnumber our own human cells.
Most of these little guys live
inside your digestive system.
In fact, you can have up to
2 kilograms worth in there.
The person sitting
next to you right now
might share around 99% of the
same human DNA as yourself,
but only 10% of the
same microbial DNA.
So experts are now
saying that it's
these microbes and
the differences
in our microbiome genetics which
account for a large part of who
we are as unique human beings.
>> The microbiomes
are very complex.
We can think of it actually
as a complex organ now.
And it has very wide ranging
impact on human health.
We now understand that the
gut microbiome interacts
with the immune system,
metabolic responses, and brain
function in the host.
So at this time, we
think that establishing
a healthy microbiome
is essential.
>> Every few years, there's
greater understanding
of different systems
within the body.
And over the last decade
or so there's greater,
I suppose, acknowledgment
of the role of bacteria,
both in our gastrointestinal
system, but also on our skin.
The gut's responsible
for our mood.
It's responsible for
our interpretation
of our environment.
It alters the way in
which we feel about life.
>> So we have bugs everywhere.
We have in our
sinuses, our ears.
We have on our skin.
We have them in our
digestive tract.
Everywhere you look, there are
bugs that live symbiotically
with us.
>> Bacteria don't just sit
there and chomp away on whatever
remnants have managed to
make it past your stomach.
They're there to
produce metabolites.
Those metabolites might
fire up your immune system,
your innate immune
system, or they
might work really well with
it and keep inflammation
at bay in your body.
>> It has multiple functions,
but one of the most important
one is what's called
colonization resistance,
where it prevents us from
colonizing with new bugs that
might like to infect us.
Unless we damage it
partially with antibiotics,
then, yes, it colonizes.
>> Now we're starting to
understand that keeping
the bugs healthy within our
body and keeping, I suppose,
a really nice, healthy
environment for our bacteria is
a far better thing to do
that than to try and kill
everything.
When you think about how much
antibiotics we're using just
in health care, let alone
in our farming practices
and our food preparation,
it's a massive problem.
We have to scale back
on antibiotic use.
>> We are decimating a very,
very important symbiotic
relationship with
these bacteria.
>> What we have learned over
the last few decades is that
actually there are many,
many more microbes that are
beneficial to us than are
actually harmful to us.
Antibiotics are associated
with damage to the microbiota,
and have also been
associated with the increased
risk of the
non-communicable disorders.
Multiple courses or
prolonged use of antibiotics
can cause a permanent
state of degradation
that then acquires
its own resilience
and is much harder
to recover from.
>> If you put the microbiome
into a state of flux,
what recolonizes
may not be healthy.
>> A lot of the good bugs that
we've lost in our gut are not
probiotics, and so you
can never replace those.
We often see a spiral downwards
of people where they're
given antibiotics for
infection, and then
something else pops up,
and they've actually
been made more
susceptible to infection
by being treated with
antibiotics because when you
wipe out the good bugs
that are strengthening
the immune system,
they're obviously
less able to resist infection.
In your gut, you have receptors
for your immune system called
Peyer's patches.
And that's the principle
window that the immune system
has on the outside world.
And if you've got lots of bad
bugs stuck to your Peyer's
patches, then the
immune system says,
ah, we've got to try
and kill those off.
We'll produce inflammation.
There are all sorts
of health consequences
that flow on from there.
The microbiota is less
able to support health
and more likely to
promote disease.
We're talking about allergic
disease, autoimmune disease,
metabolic conditions, such
as diabetes, Type 1 and 2.
We have obesity, cardiovascular
disease and stroke all
linked in with
metabolic disarray.
We have some cancers.
And we have neurodevelopmental
problems now afflicting
modern society.
That's not just
Alzheimer's, it's
depression, it's
schizophrenia, it's ADHD.
It's all of these
common illnesses
that we're seeing increasing
rapidly in modern society.
>> As a young person, I took
multiple courses of antibiotics
due to persistent
chest infections.
And it wasn't until later
though that I found out
about the damage this might
have done to my gut microbiome.
According to Dr.
Margie, my microbiome
is looking pretty solid compared
to the Australian population.
My capacity to
downregulate inflammation
is quite impressive.
Significantly, though, it's
my microbial diversity,
an important indicator
of microbiome health,
which is showing up as
a little concerning.
Normally, a wide variety
of bugs in your gut
is a positive sign of health.
Mine, though, is a
little low, and this
could be the result of
the antibiotic treatment
I had when I was a teenager.
I'm wondering if I can increase
that diversity somehow.
Is there anyone in
the world who hasn't
been exposed to antibiotics?
>> Well, pretty much everyone
in Western society has been
exposed to antibiotics.
I mean, you have to go to a
culture, an ancient culture,
where they're eating their
native diet, where they're not
exposed to all the processed
foods-- so the carbohydrates,
the sugars that we have
in our Western society,
living a more traditional diet.
>> Could it be, I wonder, that
modern society is actually
causing all our
gut health issues?
Potentially then if I remove
myself from these things,
I wonder if I could positively
impact my microbiome health,
in particular, the diversity
of the bugs in my gut?
What if I were to go to one
of these cultures somewhere
around the world and have a
look at their microbiomes,
bring some samples
back for you, but also
see how my microbiome
changes whilst I'm there.
Would that be interesting?
>> I think that
would be amazing.
It would be really
exciting to see
what happens to your
microbiome during that time.
>> Biggest question, though,
I suppose, is, where do I go?
[JET ENGINE ROARS]
[MUSIC - THE SALVADORES,
"WILSON"]
"Wilson, you are a good
friend on the seaside
till the very end.
We played air hockey.
I spent all of my
Dollarmite money."
>> We're going to have to do--
we to check out how deep that
water is and see if the sand
is going to be very squishy.
So--
>> I've got to test the depth.
>> You do.
You have to walk across it.
>> Why am I doing it though?
Why can't someone else do it?
>> Why?
>> It's my doco.
[MUSIC - THE SALVADORES,
"WILSON"]
"This town, this town
has got me on my knees.
Fuck you, Los Angeles."
>> Three days of traveling,
and we've arrived.
We're deep in the Namibian bush
in the Nyae Nyae Conservancy,
far from any major
civilization, but right
in the heart of San territory.
The San, commonly referred
to as the Bushmen,
are an ancient
hunter-gatherer tribe
who have lived in
southern Africa
for 60,000 years,
which makes them
one of the first
modern human societies.
Genetically speaking,
the San are often
considered the true ancestors
of today's human being.
So from a gut and
microbiome standpoint,
they're the perfect
participants for further study.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's been a long day,
but we're finally here,
and we're going to go
meet everybody now.
It's real Bush territory.
>> Simco.
>> Simco?
>> Yeah.
>> I'm Kale.
>> OK, welcome.
>> Nice to meet you.
These are the crew.
>> The Bushmen follow a
traditional hunting-gathering
lifestyle.
And they work closely
with the land.
They know everything
about the land
and the environment around it.
They've been pushed to
limited areas, I suppose.
And then with the introduction
of people from Europe,
the same thing continued.
And they're now in very remote
areas, just like this one
here in and around the Kalahari.
But that is, again,
now limited as well.
So they're not found
in too many places.
This organization has
got a conservancy here
where they can actually
work with the Bushmen
and allow them to actually
do what they traditionally
would do and working with
them to maintain that.
>> For the next week, I'll
be living as the San do.
No phone, no laptop, no
luxuries, no nothing.
At the end of the
week, I'm going
to test my microbiome to
see how it changes whilst
living the San lifestyle.
And to be honest, I don't
really know what to expect.
One of the first things
I noticed about the San
is that the majority of them
are quite lean and exhibit great
vitality, even in the
older members of the tribe.
They move easily and have
a natural bubbliness,
which is really infectious.
Unfortunately, for
the San as a whole,
this village represents
a tiny subset
of the entire population
who predominantly do not
experience good health.
The further removed from
society and Western influence,
the healthier the San get,
which is why what we're doing
is so precious.
They have very little
access to modern medicine
and antibiotics here.
And from a microbiome
standpoint,
that's very important.
First up on the plan is to go
harvesting for some local bush
food.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Every day, a gathering until
I have more for the village
and their livestock.
>> So you can store
some in the village?
>> Yeah.
So we also share.
Yeah.
>> So you're not just
collecting food for yourself.
You're collecting for everybody.
>> Yeah, I collect
from everybody.
>> Yeah.
Is that really
important, the community?
>> Yeah, it's really important.
Of course, you
are the young one,
so you're supposed to bring
something to the others.
>> How old are you?
>> I'm 31 years old.
>> 31?
>> Yeah.
>> There you go.
They're called bush potatoes.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Bush potatoes.
>> The plant is only outside.
So the root is
inside in the ground.
So they go in to
dig that root out.
>> Yeah.
And you eat it
straightaway, this one?
>> Yeah.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So also, if you want, you
can roast it with root ash.
>> So raw or cooked?
Let's try raw.
I'm excited.
>> This is enough for us.
But we're not gathering one.
We're just gathering
a lot of them.
>> Yeah.
>> So we have a lot of
food in the village.
So everyone have a bush potato.
>> Yeah.
Should we try some?
>> Taste.
>> That seems quite
soft, actually.
Thank you.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> It tastes very starchy.
>> Like a Willie's potato.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I can just imagine all the
starches and carbohydrates
in this that are very
good for the gut bacteria.
Do you feel like
you're very healthy?
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
>> Vitamin inside.
>> Lots of nutrition in there.
Yeah, yeah.
Cheers.
One of the most
stark differences
in diet between traditional
cultures like the San
and us in the West is the
amount of fiber we consume.
Overwhelmingly,
those in the West
are reported to
consume much less fiber
than is optimal to maintain
gastrointestinal health.
One of the hallmarks of a
traditional hunter-gatherer
diet is a truckload of fiber
each and every single day.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The way fiber helps
your gut is not solely,
but principally through the
boost effect to good bacteria
in your gut.
>> We know that if you change
your diet from one type
of eating or style of eating
to another, within 24 hours,
you will have shifted the major
players in your microbiome.
>> One particular type of
fiber, which is receiving a lot
of attention is
resistant starch.
>> Resistant starch is
a carbohydrate source,
a fuel source for our
microbiome in our gut.
We need to have it.
So rice, bananas,
tubers, yams, all
of those sorts of things that
contain resistant starch are
essential for our microbiome.
If we don't have them, our
bacteria cannot thrive.
And if our bacteria can't
thrive, we can't thrive.
>> Most starch is
easily digested.
However, resistant
starch is not.
Instead, it becomes food
for your gut bacteria.
Starch is dissolved
in the small intestine
and then absorbed by
your body, providing you
with energy and nutrition.
But the remaining
non-digestible portion
is called resistant starch.
And this resistant starch
continues its journey
through your gut and arrives
at the large intestine.
Here, we see the
resistant starch
exposed to the
probiotic bacteria
of the large intestine.
Some of these probiotic bugs
specialize in breaking down
the resistant starch.
This breakdown process
provides the bacteria
with the fuel they
need to survive.
As they use the
starch for energy,
they release small carbohydrate
molecules which the neighboring
bacteria feed on.
As these bacteria feed, they
excrete even smaller molecules
as waste.
One of the final waste
products is called butyrate,
a highly anti-inflammatory
fatty acid,
which is also an energy
source for your body.
As this butyrate builds
up, it is absorbed
by the large intestine.
And its presence
encourages blood
to flow into the
surrounding vessels,
keeping the tissue healthy.
If your diet includes
enough resistant starch,
these cells will use butyrate
as their main source of energy.
Here, we can see the
molecular surface of one
of the intestinal cells.
The surface is covered
in special proteins
that actively pump butyrate
molecules into the cell.
Once inside, they can
be harvested for energy.
Among an array of
health benefits,
butyrate could stop us getting
certain types of cancer.
Intestinal cells are
sensitive to DNA damage
caused by environmental,
diet, and lifestyle factors.
This cell's DNA
has been damaged,
resulting in a mutation.
More damage could
accumulate over time
as the cell divides, which
could lead to colorectal cancer.
But a steady supply of
butyrate allows the damage
to be more easily
detected, and the cell
can activate a suicide
program in response.
Because the damaged
cell destroys itself,
it can't progress
to form a cancer.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Thank you.
One thing that you
notice is that most
of the foods that we've had
today are carbohydrates.
And when we look
at the microbiomes
of these traditional
cultures, we
find that often these
sort of carbohydrates
contain no starches, which
actually nourish and diversify
the microbiome.
So being out here, you can
see it's no surprise why
that's the case.
It's pretty cool.
>> The microbiome in our
gastrointestinal tract is
influenced by everything
that goes into our mouth.
So a little bit of fermented
food, lots of vegetables,
heaps of food that's maybe
been washed, but not sprayed
with pesticides.
So organic food's
a great way to go.
These are the sorts
of things that we
want to be doing to make sure
that the microbiome in our gut
is really good.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Maybe this one?
>> Thank you.
It's got a hard seed in there.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Oh, it tastes beautiful.
It tastes like vanilla.
It's got vanilla.
>> Nutrition has a big
impact on our microbiomes.
Our preservatives,
artificial sweeteners,
they all have an impact
on our microbiome.
They all interact with
the bugs in our gut.
>> The long-term diet plays a
critical role in establishing
an ongoing healthy microbiota.
Short-term changes in your
diet have very rapid effects,
but also once you stop that,
they're lost very rapidly.
>> To me, the bugs make up 80%
of the equation and the diet
20%.
>> And I think if we followed
a diet that's kind of 80-20,
much the same as the Greeks or
Sardinians or the Okinawans do,
we might start to get
statistics like they do.
They don't have Alzheimer's.
They don't have heart disease.
They don't die from cancer.
These guys are living
a really long time,
and they don't stress too
much about their food.
The further we go into extremes,
the harder it is on the body.
>> So in our language
we called it chocho.
>> Chocho?
>> Yeah, chocho.
>> Chocho.
>> So--
>> It smells quite musky.
>> If we go back, when they
roast it, you will taste.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, so we can taste it later.
So there we go.
>> Yeah.
We called it, in our
language we called it "j-ah."
>> "J-ah?"
>> "J-ah."
>> Yeah, a "j-ah."
>> Looks like a pineapple.
>> Yeah, it's like a pineapple.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> It tastes like a sweet--
it's almost like a
citrusy watermelon.
That's how I would describe it.
It's good.
[CHEERING]
I'm surprised at the
abundance of food
available from the land
surrounding the San's village.
And I know that
my microbiome will
be making some shifts already.
As the day warms up, we
begin to feel thirsty.
But rather than head
back to camp for water,
the San look underground.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> One of our guides digs deep
in the ground for something
called a water root.
And this simple
interaction with the soil
is enough to contribute to the
population of gut microbiota
that the San have.
In fact, environmental
interaction
may be a key player
in establishing
a location-dependent
microbiome signature,
helping the San to thrive in
this particular environment.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
So this teeming with soil,
microbes, fiber, straight in.
Very moist.
Tastes like a cucumber.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And everybody shares.
>> Yeah, and tomorrow,
if we do a hunting.
We do a hunting for full day.
>> Yeah.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Ah!
>> Whole new perspective
on a drinking game.
>> You know, we are limiting
our exposure to our environment.
And in doing so,
we're actually having
an impact on the microbiome.
It's kind of like an
artificial cleanliness, really.
>> The results of being
too clean are now that
we're getting more
allergies, more asthma,
more sensitivities, and they're
more dangerous than what they
ever have been before.
And we're now
getting diseases that
used to only affect people
in old age in younger years,
primarily because the immune
system is just not geared up
to be able to protect us as
well as what it used to be.
>> So food allergy is one
of these non-communicable
disorders that have increased
dramatically in recent decades.
Many researchers
around the world
have been working on a
particular approach called
oral immunotherapy to
treat food allergy.
And this involves
feeding a child
the food they're allergic to,
starting at very low doses,
building up to a higher
dose, and then continuing
on that higher dose.
Only a small subset
of children seem
to be able to gain tolerance
after oral immunotherapy.
I combined a
particular probiotic,
a lactobacillus rhamnosus
strain, together
with oral immunotherapy
to treat peanut allergy.
We randomized 62 children
with peanut allergy
to either receive our
probiotic peanut immunotherapy
treatment or a placebo.
We treated them with this
combined probiotic peanut
therapy every day for 18 months.
We then stopped the
treatment, we waited a month,
and then challenged
them to peanut
to see if they had
developed tolerance.
To our surprise and
delight, we found that
over 80% of children who
received our probiotic peanut
therapy developed tolerance
and went home eating peanut,
as compared to only 4%
in the placebo group.
Immune responses to
peanut had moved away
from allergy towards tolerance.
And these immune changes were
persistent four years later.
This long-lasting
effect is associated
with long-lasting clinical
benefit for these children
with peanut allergy, who now
no longer have peanut allergy.
>> My name is Natasha
Campbell-McBride.
I'm a medical doctor.
And I'm the creator of the
GAPS nutritional protocol.
GAPS stands for Gut
And Psychology Syndrome
and Gut And Physiology
Syndrome, which
is based on the functional
composition of our gut flora,
the microbial
community that lives
inside our digestive system.
So GAPS' nutritional
protocol, in my opinion,
should be the base treatment
for every chronic disease,
no matter how far away from the
digestive system it develops.
Whether it is a mental
illness, a learning disability,
an autoimmune disease, an
allergy, asthma, eczema,
skin condition,
urinary condition,
or any other chronic
degenerative condition,
we have an epidemic of
GAPS in the Western world,
and this epidemic is
getting deeper and deeper
with every generation.
The babies that are
born today, this year,
have worse gut flora
than babies who
were born even a couple of
years ago or five years ago.
Because every generation gets
worse and worse gut flora.
And this is the real
epidemic of GAPS,
of abnormal gut flora and all
the illnesses connected to it.
The environment we human beings
have created on our planet
is unfit for our
children to come into.
This is not genetics.
Genetics have nothing
to do with this.
This is purely lifestyle and
diet and the environment.
We talked about what GAPS is.
These children were born with
a perfectly normal brain.
These were perfectly normal
babies at the moment of birth.
But they acquire
abnormal gut flora
from their parents from day one.
C-section babies
acquired their flora
from the hands of people
who look after them,
from the nipples of the mother,
from the skin of the mother,
from the environment.
That's why research shows
that the c-section babies have
a much lower diversity of
microbes in their gut flora.
So their gut flora
is also damaged right
from the beginning.
Breastfeeding went out of
fashion at the same time,
as all the formula feeding
came out in the market.
Breastfeeding is
essential for the baby
to develop normal,
healthy, diverse gut flora.
Children who are bottle fed
develop completely different
gut flora from children
who were breastfed.
And that abnormal gut
flora in the child
predisposes them
usually to allergies,
to asthma, eczema, and
learning disabilities,
and various other problems.
When I started practicing
as a medical doctor,
we were diagnosing one
child in 10,000 with autism.
In fact, when I was studying,
when I was a medical student,
there were no autistic children.
We haven't seen one.
There were no autistic children
to show to us as students when
we were studying psychiatry.
It was so rare.
Today, in the
English-speaking world,
we are diagnosing
one child in 35, 36.
If that's not an epidemic,
I don't know what is.
And the scientists have already
projected that line to 2020s,
and they're predicting that
we will be soon diagnosing
one child in two with autism.
And it's not going
to stop there.
It will continue increasing.
How does a child develop autism?
I have no doubt that almost
100% of autistic children
today were born with a
perfectly normal brain.
These were perfectly
normal babies.
But they acquired abnormal
gut flora from day one
from their parents,
and that gut flora
turned their digestive system
into a major source of toxicity
in the body.
The child's brain is clogged
with toxins coming out
of the digestive system.
All the information coming
out of the sensory organs,
from the ears, eyes, tactile
sensitivity, and so on,
turns into a noise
in the child's brain.
And from that noise, the
child cannot derive any useful
information.
So in order to help all of these
children, what we need to do,
we need to start from
the digestive system.
We need to drive out
pathogenic microbes.
We need to restore
the normal balance
of microbes in the gut flora.
We need to heal and
seal the gut wall,
close all those
holes in the gut wall
so the toxins stop leaking out.
GAPS diet is quite easy
to cook and to prepare.
It is based on those traditional
diets from indigenous cultures
all over the world.
We begin from the easiest
to digest foods and the most
healing foods.
The most healing
foods in the GAPS diet
are homemade meat stock,
homemade soups, stews,
cooked vegetables
and fermented foods.
This is the most healing foods.
This allows us to
rebuild new gut lining,
rebuild new digestive
system fairly rapidly.
And when that happens,
that river of toxicity
stops coming from
the gut to the brain,
and the brain cleanses itself.
From that moment on, the child
comes out of the toxic form
and starts learning.
The younger the child is
when that moment happens,
the quicker children recover
and the more fully they recover.
So children under
the age of 4 and 1/2,
maximum five, in my
clinic, many of them
recovered from autism fully.
They have a real ability
to shake autism off,
to learn, to catch up, and
just start developing normally.
It is reversible.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We're currently roasting
the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],,
which is almost like a truffle.
They actually bury it under
the hot sand by the coals,
and after about 10 or 15
minutes, we bring it out.
And I'm assuming it's
going to taste pretty good.
[LAUGHTER]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Do you want to see?
Oh, wow.
It tastes like, oh, wow.
That is so nice.
Delicious.
Good, yeah?
The San are a happy people.
In fact, more than that,
they seem almost blissful.
Materially, they may be less
affluent than us in the West.
However, their richness
lies in the joy in life
they bring to each day.
And this may be more than
the simple relaxed existence
of the San way of life.
Research is now finding
that the gut microbiota
play a significant role in
maintaining our mental health.
In fact, the gut is now being
considered our second brain.
>> From the moment
of conception,
all the way through to our
adult life until we die,
our brain and our gut are
interconnected through the same
neurology that originally got
it going in the first place.
>> A lot of our
neurotransmitters are made
in the gut.
If we're not making those
aromatic amino acids
through the shikimate
pathway, through the bacteria,
we are not making our
neurotransmitters.
Depression, anxiety
are all increasing.
>> Nearly 40% of what circulates
in our blood originates
in our gut flora.
>> There was a study done at
Deakin University showing that
diet can actually treat
major depressive disorder.
They took a group of
depressed patients
and assigned them
either a whole foods,
Mediterranean-style
diet, or social support.
After three months,
the study found
that a third of those
patients in the dietary group
met criteria for remission
of their major depression,
compared to only 8% from
the social support group.
>> So if our gut's
not in great shape,
then our minds aren't
in great shape.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> One way to test the fortitude
of the San's happiness is
to ask them if you can take
their poo back to Australia
with you.
So what we've just done is we've
asked the village if we can
actually take some of their--
take some of their
poo home, basically.
You know, microbiome
testing kids.
And they're just
discussing it now.
And we're hoping
it doesn't sound
as weird as we think it does.
But it might.
>> How many do you want?
>> Three or four.
If-- OK.
>> OK, yeah.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So this is the kit.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And this is a--
looks like a spoon.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And so just a very
small amount of poo.
And just in there.
Lid on.
>> And he will do it.
[LAUGHTER]
>> You come here and in the
bushes, and we can just--
>> Yeah.
This is one of the more
awkward requests I've made.
So what we've done is
ask each of the guys
to actually go
out and do a poop,
and then they're going
to come and grab me,
and I'm going to
go and take a swab
and put it in our
little testing kit.
So here we go.
OK.
>> I'm done.
>> You're ready?
>> Yeah.
>> OK, show me the way.
>> Yeah, this is the way.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Has anyone ever done
this for you before?
Whew, it's a good one.
First time?
Well, there's a
first for everything.
>> This is my first, yeah.
>> I'm sorry.
Well, it looks very healthy.
Oh gosh, it nearly
got on my finger.
Done.
>> OK.
>> Number one, done.
Yeah, good.
I've never-- I'm just filling
out the details for each sample
so that we can identify
everybody at the lab.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> They all think
this is hilarious.
>> '82.
>> 1982.
Do you know month?
>> January.
There's a lot of flies on me.
Thank you.
All right, well,
that's all done.
Thank god.
And we're going to send those
back to the lab in Australia,
and we'll see what they say.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You know, work doesn't
become mainstream for many years
in anything that's new.
All truth passes through stages.
It's first ridiculed.
Then it's violently opposed.
And then it becomes known as,
we knew it all along, of course.
>> We guesstimate around 13 and
1/2 thousand now we have done
and some are single
shots, mostly are double,
and some are 10
infusions in a row,
if we are starting to try and
reverse inflammatory bowel
disease.
Then I came across a
paper by Ben Eiseman,
the man who did the first
fecal transplant in Colorado.
And this guy was brilliant.
And he was hitting a problem,
in that post-surgery he
would give antibiotics
to someone who had had,
say, an operation in
the abdomen and they've
got a bit of pneumonia,
they were given antibiotics,
and then the patient
develops diarrhea.
And they would develop
diarrhea with what's
called pseudomembranous colitis,
so severe that in that paper,
the death rate was 74% of those
who developed pseudomembranous
colitis.
That's huge.
It's overwhelming.
And he had this idea of
doing a fecal impact.
So the first case out of
four-- and four out of four was
dramatic--
was given one enema,
a second enema.
And the patient,
as they described,
was in the terminal stages of
his terrible illness, something
like that.
Within 24 hours, the
diarrhea went away.
Another enema, and the patient
was discharged 10 days later,
having spent like 46
days in intensive care,
but under specialists, doctors.
What fixed him?
Poo.
Hasn't even gone to university.
Wasn't a specialist's
poo either.
It was a nurse's poo.
So we're more on
the cutting edge
of figuring out what works.
For example, we treated
three patients this year
with constipation,
and we were surprised
that their MS disappeared.
We write them up as three
cases where MS was reversed.
We did all the MRIs.
We had a couple of patients
with Parkinson's who
were re-examined
by the neurologist
and can't find any
Parkinson's anymore.
And I think there's going to
be a lot of changes occurring
in the way we practice medicine.
Because in the past, there was
some divided among specialties,
but now we're crossing
specialties, you know?
If you do an FMT and a
neurological condition
gets reversed, the
neurologists are
going to start practicing
fecal transplantation.
They will.
When there's a "crapsule," as
we call it, to be prescribed,
of course, they will do that.
There may be some
pure floras from which
we will extract bacteria that
may reverse, say, diabetes.
And it's very much in the cards.
There are bacteria that can
increase your metabolism
and reverse obesity.
So I've got all
hopes for components
of these untainted
gut floras, but we'd
love to have some pure, really
primordial never previously
exposed to antibiotics
gut flora donors.
Yeah, it'd be great.
[CHANTING]
>> My time with the San
has been incredible,
and the week flies
by in an instant.
Tonight is the last night, and
the San put on a celebration
for us.
The fire gives them a
chance to sing and dance
and to bring good fortune
on our activities tomorrow.
The simplicity of the San
lifestyle is beautiful to see.
Their entire day is made up
of a constant interaction
with their immediate
environment.
And I know that this
relationship has a big part
to play in their apparent
health and well-being.
For a society whose
culture and even biology
may provide so many
benefits to us in the West,
it's a bittersweet feeling
having our trip come to an end
so soon.
But tonight is for having fun.
Last night, we got up to go to
the toilet a couple of times,
and there were hyena making
noises just over the bushes.
And we had that confirmed this
morning when we found tracks
around the camp, where the
hyena were actually coming
in and getting a closer look.
Today, we're going
to get, hopefully,
more familiar with the animals
because we're going hunting.
So hopefully we can actually
get something and come home.
I'm told it's a
pretty rare occasion
to actually bag an animal, but
hopefully today it happens.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
The San have become famous for
that hunting techniques, which
employ the use of
poisonous arrows
to bring down large game.
So this is where the poison
comes from, that we actually
lace the arrows with
that we're going
to use when we go hunting.
It comes from this worm
found in the marula tree.
And the guys are going to prep
it now and then actually put it
on arrows.
The poisonous concoction is
so dangerous it can bring down
a fully grown giraffe.
The hunters are very
careful when handling it,
ensuring they have no open cuts
through which the poison can
enter the bloodstream.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
In the same way
they're doing here,
in the past, the older mans,
they was come close together
like this, and they sit and
apply the poison to the arrows.
And the next man, which is
coming to them, when he come,
he make a mistake, and
the poison stab his feet.
They tried to give
him the medicines,
but it was a problem.
Just one minute,
then the persons die.
>> In one minute they died?
>> Yeah.
>> Needless to say, I leave
this one to the experts.
And while the hunters
apply the poison,
I get a lesson in shooting, with
the beginner arrows, of course.
>> And you pull it.
>> OK, so like this?
>> Like that and then, yeah.
>> Like that?
>> That's good.
Oh, I think that side.
>> Woo!
The hunt is loosely
led by the eldest
of the group, a man of
almost 70 years of age.
The old man leads because
he is the teacher.
He has the most experience
and can offer wisdom
during the hunt.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
So we've just found some
tracks for a kudu, which
are fresh from this morning.
So I think we're going
to try and track the kudu
and follow along.
I'm quite nervous and excited.
Now, I'm really letting the
experts go ahead a little bit
because I think we're
getting closer to the animal.
It's still quite
nerve-wracking because I'm
carrying deathly poisonous
arrows, a spear with which I
don't really know what to do.
But I'm still hoping we get one.
We walk for hours following
what looked like ambiguous marks
in the earth.
However, the hunters assure me
that the kudu is not far ahead.
It's just on the move.
As we close in on the kudu, the
San become tense and serious.
They whisper
instructions to the group
and move forward towards
the sound of the kudu.
The hunters urge me onward.
And at this point,
all I can think about
is why the inexperienced
tourist with the white clothes,
holding a spear he
doesn't know how to use,
is heading up the kudu hunt.
But I'm so lost in the
moment that I move anyway.
The hunters stalk
forward, moving as close
as they can to the kudu.
They're about to fire.
The kudu escapes, and we
must walk home empty-handed.
The sourness I feel
at missing the kudu
slowly dissipates
into a realization
that the San way of life
would say to let it go.
The reality of San life is that
animal protein is a rare treat.
And thus, a diet
rich in plant foods
is what's necessary
for them to survive.
And I think there might
be a lesson in that, too.
OK, so it's the last day.
We're going to test my poo.
As you do.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's a sad goodbye, but we
must head home to Australia
to find out just
what sort of bacteria
and other microbes the San
have present in their gut.
I wonder also how my
microbiome has changed
while spending time here.
Before we leave though, there
is one last thing I have to do.
Could I order a
kudu steak, please?
>> Steak?
I know what I'm having.
>> OK, so it's not the
same as what we wanted.
However, this will have
to suffice for now.
It's as good as I expected.
Hello.
>> Hi, Kale.
>> After six weeks my microbiome
tests are ready for analysis.
You got some data for me?
>> I've got some fantastic
data to show you--
>> Lovely.
>> Come with me.
>> Let's have a look.
So what have we got?
>> So what have we got?
So we're looking at the major
players in your gut microbiome.
So this is before you went,
and this is when you came back.
So it's as if you've had a
kind of microbiome transplant
between Australia
and Africa, you know?
It's been a big shift
in your microbiome.
>> In only one
week with the San,
my microbiome has shifted
from a low range of diversity,
which is associated
with poor health,
into a much higher range.
In fact, I've improved my
microbial diversity by 12%.
>> It catapulted you out of
this lower percentile here,
all the way over to here--
>> Wow.
>> --within the normal range.
And in fact, you're
sitting in between two
of the African people,
with their microbiomes.
So you've really increased
your biodiversity
in a very healthful
way during that time.
>> From what you found
of their microbiomes,
what could you sort of
ascertain that they eat?
>> Well, their diet
looks to be very,
very different to what
an Australian diet is.
And that's why we're
seeing that shift.
You know, they have probably a
lot more plant-based nutrition
in there as well.
Their gut PH looks to be really
nice because Bacteroidetes
are expanded.
It's a completely
different sort of profile.
>> The San, on average,
had significantly healthier
microbiome samples compared
to the average Australian,
myself included.
Their inflammatory
microbes are vastly
outweighed by
anti-inflammatory microbes.
And their microbial
diversity is much more varied
than us in the West.
As you can see, though, after
a week living with them,
my own diversity had begun
to match that of the San.
Oh, that's fascinating.
I'm speechless.
I don't know what
to say about it.
It's amazing.
"The San Diet," it's a new
book that's coming out.
[LAUGHS]
>> "The San Diet."
Well, it looks like it's really
worked for your microbiome
in a very short space of time.
>> Wow.
That's really amazing, ain't it?
>> As a practitioner, there's
so much to take away from these
results.
Firstly, I love the
fact that food alone
can change the microbiome.
And secondly, I love the
speed at which it changes.
A little change in
your environment
results in a big
change in your body.
And you can magnify that.
And you should be
encouraged by that.
>> I'm so excited
about what we learned.
It doesn't mean that we all
have to go to Africa to change
our microbiome, right?
What it means is that we can
change our dietary intake,
we can improve our microbiome.
Whether those bacteria survive
when you got back to Australia,
I truly don't know.
It's probably a little bit
doubtful because, remember,
you're no longer sampling
their environment.
>> The greatest thing that we
see from this is that you can
change your gut by
changing your environment.
And you may not need
to take a supplement.
These days, we're looking
for capsules and powders
and all kinds of things, but
maybe if we kept it simple
and just go down to the park
or went out into nature,
rode our bike, or
crawled in the mud,
things could be
really good for us.
>> Mother nature created our
bodies to get our nutrition
from food, not from pills.
Food industry has
changed all our recipes
to suit its commercial agenda.
Because your health is not
on their agenda at all.
They're not responsible
for your health.
Get in the car, drive
outside the city,
find organic mixed
farms, introduce yourself
to these people, and
start buying directly
from these farms.
Cook everything from
fresh ingredients.
Buy everything in
the shape and form
that mother nature created it.
Do not buy any
processed ingredients.
Nothing processed is bought.
Nothing in tins or
packets or powders
or in any kind of
processed shape or form.
If you're providing the
right quality materials,
if you're controlling
your gut flora,
making sure that it's
dominated by beneficial species
of microbes, then your
body has a real chance
to rebuild itself from
quality materials,
from quality, healthy,
vibrant young cells.
And as a result, you will have a
healthy liver and a healthy gut
wall and healthy lungs
and healthy heart
and healthy brain.
It is difficult to change
the diet in your family.
Of course, it is
difficult. It's hard work.
But what you're
doing when you're
changing the diet
in your children
and in the whole family, you
are laying a solid foundation
for a happy, successful life.
When you start
changing the diet,
and when you are firm and strong
with it, and you don't back up,
you are taking that power
back into your own hands,
and you lay a wonderful
foundation for your children
to be healthy and well for
the rest of their lives.
>> I think an optimal microbiome
exists, but it's not one.
I think it's multiple,
and it's unclear
whether it's tens,
hundreds, thousands
of different signatures that can
support optimal human health.
It's very likely that we can
see traditional societies
with very different microbiota
that still support health.
>> If your diet's very
narrow, and it's very white,
and very simple, then maybe
what you could do is increase
the different colors and the
different variety of fruits
and vegetables that go into
your diet so that you're getting
a broader variety to feed
different types of bacteria
in your microbiome.
>> Whole food, high fiber diets.
So lots and lots of fiber.
That's what we need to
feed our microbiome.
We're talking about real food.
So it grew in the ground.
It didn't come out of a packet.
It was once alive, and
you can actually recognize
what it is on your plate.
If you can't do that,
probably not a good idea
to put it in your mouth.
>> Because modern medicine
is good at keeping you alive
for a long time, the
real question is,
do you want to thrive
during that time?
Do you want to thrive
during your 80 years here,
and do you want to maybe
even make it to 120?
>> I think the optimal
microbiome does exist.
I just don't think
we've found it yet.
And that's probably
the biggest problem
because we're striving
for this perfection,
but we don't really
know where to start.
>> I don't know that there is
any one optimal microbiome.
The good quote unquote, "bugs
in you" that do a set of jobs,
if you like, in your
gut may be totally
different to the good bugs in
me that are doing the same jobs.
>> Why do you want
to lose the weight?
Why do you want to
be around longer?
And why do you want to thrive?
Is it so you can see
your grandkids grow up?
Is it so you can walk your son
down the aisle at his wedding?
All these different things.
That's really where this becomes
very important, because that's
what some of these
cultures are getting
who have this great health.
They don't die from cancer--
the Okinawans, the Ikarians.
They're experiencing
amazing health.
>> So when I see someone with
an imbalanced microbiome,
I know that with the
correct application of diet
and lifestyle we can shift
that microbiome very quickly.
That means that we're going
to have a positive impact
on that person's life.
>> My gut feeling trying to look
around the corner will be that
there will be a lot of
microbiomes that are compatible
with health.
Just like there's a lot
of different people.
You can have short, tall,
fat, and they're quite
compatible with normal health.
But it's a collection
of bugs, and some
will have these missing,
some will have those missing,
but they'll still be healthy.
But it's like medicine
come alive, you know?
And we're starting to
realize we just don't know
shh-- about shh--, you know?
[LAUGHS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]